In this lesson, we'll be talking about sections and snippets.
Snippets is quite basic and easy to understand.
Basically, if we put code into a snippet,
we can include it in multiple places in our theme.
It allows us to reuse code,
but also to organize our code better.
Sections on the other hand are a little bit more intelligent and
we'll see why that is in this lesson.
If we go back to our theme.
liquid layout, we can see a really obvious need for a section here.
That is, we've got all this header content inside our layout.
Now what you would usually do in a Shopify theme is have a header and footer section.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to cut all of this so that's in my clipboard.
I don't want to lose it, and then I'm going to replace that with a call to a section.
Going to write section header.
Now when I hit save,
it's going to link to that section which we haven't created yet.
We're going to go in,
create a section with the same name, header.
The editor will automatically add the extension of dot liquid for us,
so we don't need to do that,
and it also automatically adds in a schema,
style sheet and JavaScript tags, very handy.
Okay, we'll get into schemas in depth in the next lesson but for now,
what I'm going to do is paste that liquid and HTML code directly into here.
If I hit save, refresh
any page because every page in a theme right now uses the same layout,
we'll see that nothing's changed, okay?
Actually something has changed,
and that is that we have now got all of this encapsulated in a Shopify generated div tag.
It gives it an ID of Shopify section dash,
and then the name of the section.
It also gives it a class of Shopify section.
Let's create another section,
and let's call it footer.
After the main content,
we usually have a footer and we can put that into its own section.
If I save that, it will link to a footer that doesn't exist yet,
so we need to create it.
I'll create this footer.liquid file in my sections.
I will go up here and let's just open up a footer tag.
Close the footer tag,
and maybe just put some copyright information there copyright, Christopher Dodd.
There's one thing I'v forgotten to do and that's to
actually name the section in the schema.
We want to change this to footer,
and then in our header,
we want the section name to be header.
This is what's going to show up in the customizer.
As I said, we'll go more into schemas,
but basically all of this is for the customizer.
If I go back into any page because they all use the same layout,
we can see that we've got a similar tag generated for the footer as well.
Shopify dash, section, dash and the name of the section which is footer,
and of course the class Shopify section.
Now you can see down here,
it's not nicely formatted,
but inside you've got the footer tag with copyright Christopher Dodd.
Now what I want to show you is how that looks in the customizer.
This is a good visual representation of what's going on here.
All I did there was I right-clicked on
customize theme to go to the customizer for this theme.
Now you'll see on the homepage we have header and footer.
These are the sections as they appear enact theme customizer.
If we go to any page, any template,
because we are using the same layout file,
we'll get header and footer on every page.
Go back to the homepage.
I'm actually going to remove footer from our theme.liquid file.
Just to show you how that would show up in the customizer.
If I go to the customizer,
refresh the page, then we only see the header.
This is something I covered in the last class
so that should be just a recap for most of you.
But as you can see what this really bear theme,
we have created all the sections that exist in this theme.
If we go to any other page,
there is no section in-between header and footer for this theme yet.
If we go to theme settings,
we only have the default checkout list of customizations here.
We can add to this as well.
Here you can see the official version of this.
It's the theme kit, template theme.
Again, this is just the one you get by running theme new in theme kit.
Alright, so to create our next section,
one thing we can modify,
and this is something that is quite common is to take
all the code within a template and move that into a section.
Now that might sound a bit weird at first,
but we'll explain why that is in just a second.
I'm going to call this section collection template because that's essentially what it is.
Then I'm going to create that section.
Now and here we've got a schema,
and I'm just going to paste the exact same code we had in our collection template.
I'm going to call this collection template in the actual schema.
That is the name that'll show up in the customizer.
If we go to our collection page,
now we'll see collection template,
which is the name we defined in the schema to be a section in here.
As you notice, because we have no settings in our schema,
it says here no content or settings.
We can actually customize this.
The reason why we would have
an basically an empty collection template file and link
straight to a section with all the code for that template there,
is because we can now customize it using the customizer.
If we just left that code here,
it would sit outside of a section and then we wouldn't have
access to a schema for which we can edit with.
That's not necessarily true in the sense that there
is a settings schema for the theme as a whole,
but we want to section the settings for this particular template.
We want to move it into its own section.
Okay, right now we haven't really done anything because we haven't set any settings.
Maybe I want to create a setting here and we do that in the settings object.
What's something I might want to customize as the user about this page.
Well, maybe I want to control the pagination.
Remember when I say user,
I'm talking about the shop admin who's using this customizer in this case.
Maybe I want to control the pagination.
What I'm going to do is open up an object,
and inside this object I'm going to be writing,
this is all JSON format by the way,
so we're going to be opening up a double quote,
and what we need to do here is insert an input.
The place you can learn more about that is if we just Google Shopify input settings.
I believe it's in configuring theme settings right here.
If I search for input settings,
here we can see the basic input settings.
Text for instance, this is the input setting that we would put in.
We can also put in like an image picker,
we can put in a set of radio buttons,
a dropdown, all things, checkbox.
For pagination, I think it makes sense to use a range slider.
It'll show up like this.
The reason why a range slider would be good in this instance,
is because we want to restrict the user's input to something reasonable.
We don't want to paginate any less than say two,
and we don't want to paginate any more than say 25.
Otherwise, it'll take too long to load the page.
What we can do is we can copy this example right here,
go back into our code.
Which tab was that? Okay, here we go.
Rather than writing this word for word,
I'm just going to copy and paste it in.
Now we have got an object which represents our setting.
The first thing we need is the type,
and this defines that this is going to be a range input.
The ID is what we can use to access it in liquid.
We need to change this to something that makes more sense.
I'm just going to call it pagination.
Then right here, we need to insert a minimum value.
Because this is a number, I'm going to get rid of the double quotes and
put in let's say five.
The maximum they can paginate by,
I'm going to say is 25.
The step is the increment that they can use.
I only want them to be able to make a selection in five step increments.
Units, we can put in here as products per page,
but unfortunately this unit attribute has a limit of three characters.
So I'm just not going to use the unit in this instance.
Label is what gets shown to the user.
We're going to write in here products per page,
and the default value I'm going to make is five.
If I hit save here,
there are no errors,
thankfully, and then I can refresh the page.
Then once I go into that section,
we can actually find our range slider in here and update it.
Now of course, we have created this selection,
but we haven't actually done anything with it.
We're going to need to go back to our section,
and reference this setting value by its ID.
Instead of here where it says by five,
what I'm going to do is reference that ID.
The way we do that is through the section object.
Because we're in a section, we can access the data within
a schema of a section through this section object.
I start by grabbing that section object,
and now I essentially have access to this and we want to go inside here.
What I'm going to do, put.settings.
Now, I have access to all the settings,
and inside I want to access this one,
which the ID is pagination.
I'm going to type pagination,
and that should be all we need to get this to work.
Going back, refreshing the page.
If I go into collection template now,
and I set it to 10,
should be 10 showing up per page.
This collection only has about 10 products.
Let's go on the old collection.
Now we're in a collection that has more than 10 products.
You can see here, it's defaulted to five, 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, but I can change it to 10, hit "Save."
The page will refresh,
and now we will paginate by 10 instead of five.
So 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
That's one way we can make our collection template customizable,
by using a section and giving it a input setting in its schema.
In terms of this section,
the collection template, I'm going to leave it there,
because we're going to talk more about schemas,
and add some more options in later videos.
But what I want to show you is how we can
create a dynamic list of sections on our homepage,
using the special tag content for index.
Now first of all, we're going to have to create
a section that we would want to put on the homepage.
A good idea, something that's pretty common in a lot of themes.
Let's just go to the homepage,
so we can have a look.
There's currently nothing here,
then maybe it'd be nice to have a row of products
show up as a featured collection on the homepage.
Let's actually create that section now.
Going back into our editor,
I'm going to create a new section,
and I'm going to call it featured-collection.
The dot liquid extension gets added automatically, of course.
The first thing I'm going to want to do is change
the section name to "Featured Collection."
Now with this section,
we're not going to specifically include it on any template,
or layout like we've done here.
But we're going to be able to include it in the homepage,
through this dynamic content for index tag.
You'll see what I mean in just a second.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to set up a loop.
Let's copy the loop from here,
for our featured collection.
What we need to do because we're no longer going to be
placing this in the collection template,
is to specify a specific collection,
and that's where we now see the assign tag.
Assign allows us to create our own variables.
What I'm going to do here,
is select what collection I want to be the collection objects for this.
Again, we're not in the collection template anymore.
We don't know what collection to loop through.
Let's specify this and we can do that using the global collections object,
and accessing its handle.
I'm going to access the Featured Collection,
and let's end to that tag.
Going to hit "Save," and now we should have
a featured collection which allows us to
show the featured collection wherever we include it.
Unfortunately, we can't include it in our content for index section,
without whats called a preset.
We need to write a preset array here.
For that, I'm going to go back into the Shopify documentation.
I think it might be on a different page to this one.
There's two pages I end up switching between all the time when I'm programming sections.
It's not this one, let's type in, "Presets."
I believe it's in this one, theme sections,
this should be it, if I type in presets,
here we can find the details for presets.
What we can see here is when a section has one or more presets,
each preset becomes a dynamic section emerging can add to their theme homepage,
if the content for index object has been included in index.liquid,
so they say it right here,
we need to set a preset at least one preset,
so that we can use it in our content for index.
I'm just going to copy this array that they've set here,
we don't need all these details.
The main purpose behind presets is that we can set
some default settings for the section when it gets included on a page,
but for our purposes we just want to meet
the requirement so that we can actually use it on our homepage.
I'm going to get rid of the settings object,
we only really need category and name for this one,
and we're now missing end curly bracket I believe,
and we're missing end array tag as well.
Here in category, I'm going to leave that as custom content,
and I'm going to name this featured collection,
and you'll see where this name comes up later.
All right so now that we've created this section and it has a preset,
we can now include it in our content for index,
so we need to create that tag,
I'm going to go to the index.liquid page,
replace all of these with that special object,
content_for_index, save that, and now,
when we go to our homepage in the customizer,
might need to refresh the page.
We can now see this button for adding a section, interesting,
let's click it and we'll see here our category
and our name of our section appears in this little menu,
so if we go back to the featured collection,
that's what we wrote here,
the category and the name shows up here,
so now we can click on it, preview it,
looks good, and then we can add it right in.
Again we don't have any settings for this yet we're going to set up
some settings in the next video,
but now we have this feature collection and we can add multiple of them,
right now we've had coded the collection that we want to use,
but we can also reorder these,
turn this off and on,
and this is really user-friendly for the person who's going to
be working with the theme and they don't have to actually touch the code,
so that's why sections are super powerful,
I'm going to hit "Save" on that so it definitely gets included on the page,
that should wrap up this little introduction to sections.
We're going to remove all of these for now and let's talk about snippets.
A snippet as I said before,
is a reusable piece of code,
something that is common in Shopify theme development to reuse
multiple times is a product that's shown in a list of products,
so we've done that twice in our theme so far,
we can go into this featured collection here,
and inside this loop we can actually make this a snippet,
and that way when we're looping through products,
maybe not in a featured collection maybe somewhere else and we want to use the same code,
we can just include this snippet without having to write this out every single time,
so I'm going to cut this so it goes to my clipboard,
and I'm going to write the tag to include a snippet,
it's going to be product-item,
I guess I can call it, and I'll hit "Save",
now I will go into snippets and create product-item,
we'll paste that code directly in,
and now anywhere where this snippet gets included,
it will include this code here.
Now an important thing to note with snippets and sections,
is it gets access to the product objects still,
and it also will get access to the settings within the schema here,
so that way nesting works in Shopify is it feeds from layouts down to templates,
down to sections, down to snippets,
but snippets can be included anywhere.
What I mean by that is,
if I set a variable here in theme.liquid,
I could access that anywhere in my theme that uses that layout.
If I'm in a template for page for instance,
and I included a section that I intended to include on pages only,
I could reference the page objects specifically in that section,
and the same goes for snippets,
so for this snippet,
we know that we can use the product object anywhere where we have access to it,
so if we include a product item right
here in the loop where we've given access to a specific product,
then it'll feed right into the snippet, okay,
so if you include this snippet on a place that doesn't have
a product object specified it will break,
it will not work, but as long as we can rely on this snippet being
used in a place where there is a product object, it'll work fine,
just like on sections we can trust that will have access to
a collection if it's on the collection template,
or we can do what we did here and assign the collection specifically,
so that's about it for snippets and a good introduction to sections as well hopefully.
I just want to talk about a few more things to ground
out Shopify theme programming, and that is,
we talked about CSS and JavaScript in earlier video,
but let's just demonstrate how we would add some JavaScript to our application,
I can just throw in an annoying alert right here,
''You loaded the page'',
hit "Save" on that,
now any page I go to in my theme it'll load that JavaScript,
obviously not the best example, but you get the point,
this JavaScript gets loaded into every page,
just that I demo that quickly,
and the same thing for CSS,
if you want a rule to apply everywhere within your theme,
you can put it in here,
so maybe we want the font size of everything,
the body font size to be something ridiculous,
let's say 40 pixels,
it's pretty ridiculous if you ask me, refresh the page,
nothing's happened, let's see what's going on here in our console,
we don't actually have access to our application.css.scss,
let's have a look at that,
I think that's because the wrong name has been set,
looks like a bug with the new theme,
we're going to go into theme.liquid and change the ordering here,
so it's supposed to be css.scss,
save that, refresh the page,
now you'll see all of our font-size gets way bigger,
obviously that's a pretty silly example so I'm going to remove that style.
We've talked about layouts,
we talked about templates,
we've talked about sections,
and we've talked about snippets,
and then we've talked about assets.
Config we'll talk about in the next video when we dive deeper into JSON,
but locales, just to mention briefly what that is,
as you can see the title of this file is en.default.json,
and what this file does is hold specific language for English users,
we can create other locales,
and then we can call the right word that we need to use in a specific instance.
We can actually edit this in a user interface as well,
we can go here and click "Edit languages",
and we'll see the same options not in JSON form but in a user interface,
see right here, if I was to actually go in and change this,
maybe I say, ''Page not found'',
hit "Save" on that,
and I go here notice how this will change,
this is the actual data of what we've set in that user interface,
there we go, page not found,
and it works both ways,
if I was to edit it here in the data file,
hit "Save" on that,
go back to the user interface,
refresh that, you'll see it's the value we just changed it to.
Now, why this is important for us to understand is when we see
these attributes or these objects being called in the actual theme code,
so this one is for the 404 page,
and it defines the language that will be on the 404 page,
so let's go to the 404 page,
and we can see here we've got these special tags that are filtered with this t filter,
so if I just remove that,
what do you think is going to happen?
Let's have a look, usually the 404 page comes up if you type
in an address that doesn't exist so I am going to just type in ha ha ha ha ha,
and now instead of seeing the translated version of that you'll just see the code,
so like I said,
if you just put in a string in an output tag with quotes,
it's the same thing is just literally putting that on the page,
so we need this t tag and what that's going to do is say, ''Hey,
look up this object and then get the value of it and put it on the screen'',
so if we see general.404.title,
we go into here,
we start with general,
then we dig into 404 object,
and then we get the property of title,
so now if I refresh the page now that we've replaced or put back in that t tag,
you can see that value comes through.
This is important to note when you're going through editing
your theme and you come across one of these language variables,
maybe you want to create your own which is totally cool,
you just update this JSON file right here,
but it's important to note that when you're programming Shopify themes.
I think this has been quite a long lesson,
a few of these are probably going to be long lessons,
so I'm going to end it there.
In the next video we're going to go deeper into JSON,
so you're going to learn more about how this works and
how to work with JSON in the next video, so I'll see you there.